Mahāsiddha Virūpa's Mind Training Instruction: The Yoga of Unparalleled Compassion Oṃ svasti! The alluring nectar of unparalleled compassion Dispels all agonies of beings in the triple world. By means of the moon of bodhicitta, It makes the splendid water lily of liberation bloom as one desires. To this end, I shall offer this unstinting gift: The oral teachings of the siddha, Unwaning nectar-like teachings, Sole basis of sustenance for the fortunate. This pith instruction of Virūpa, lord of yogis, at whose steadfast lotus feet an ocean of paṇḍitas and siddhas of the noble land of India bowed the crown jewel of their heads in reverence, is the essence of the ocean-like collection of scriptures of the Mahāyāna, the teachings of the Buddha. Regarding how to practice the profound steps involved in this mind training instruction called Yoga of Unparalleled Compassion, the vajra lines in its root text tell us: Those who've protected you with boundless love, [Are embodiments of kindness-think of them with compassion. "This perpetrator of harm, too, is my mother! Though she has shown repeated kindness to me in the past, She is out of control, as if she were insane. Owing to her negative karma, she will suffer in the Avīci hell." Through contemplating thus,] Your compassion [for the three realms] will become perfect. The crux of this passage is that if bodhicitta is absent, it does not matter how much one practices the six perfections, the generation and completion stages, and so forth-those practices will not function as causes for buddhahood. Therefore, as great compassion is the foundation of all the qualities of a buddha, one should give rise to it in one's heart. To accomplish that, there are two ways: (1) a direct meditation and (2) a gradual meditation. I. Direct Meditation It is said that once one has succeeded in having compassion for one's main object of hatred, compassion for everyone else will automatically arise too. This can be practiced as follows. Begin by cultivating bodhicitta after your meditation session or at any other convenient time. Then visualize in front of you your worst enemy, someone who you would like to wreak vengeance on. Imagine what his or her body and face and so on are like. Think, "Oh, this poor enemy of mine!" and visualize that their flesh has been removed and that they are no more than a trembling skeleton. Say out loud one hundred or at least twenty-one times: "Oh, this poor enemy of mine!" This is the meditation of the flow of compassion. II. Gradual Meditation The meditation on the reasons for compassion is as follows. (1) Reflect in the following way, reciting out loud: "Why should I have compassion for this person? Because this person was my mother-oh, my poor mother!" (2) "This person has been my mother not just once but countless times since beginningless time in saṃsāra-oh, my poor mother!" (3) "Each time this person was my mother, she did not care about her life and body. The only thing she would ever think of or consider was me. She has done an incredible amount for me and protected me from inestimable harm-oh, my dear old mother!" (4) "Even though the two of us were mother and child throughout many lifetimes, at present this person is unaware of ever having been my mother because of separation through birth and death. For the same reason, I too was unaware that I used to be this person's child. Out of control, as if they were insane, they brought all kinds of harm upon me-how terribly sad! If my present mother were to become insane or possessed by a demon and were to attack me with a weapon, how incredibly sad that would be! Oh, my poor mother! Her mind is confused by fierce hatred, and she has become like an insane person. I must immediately find the best possible means to help her!" (5) "Motivated by hatred not only toward myself but also toward many other sentient beings, this person has accumulated extremely bad karma, by the power of which they will be reborn in the great hells. With no way out they must undergo unbearable suffering-how sad!" Meditate from the bottom of your heart on each of these five reasons for compassion and recite them many hundreds and thousands of times. As you do these recitations, you will develop heartfelt compassion for the object of your contemplation so strong that tears flow from your eyes. Once this occurs, gradually extend your reflection to other adversaries, and then to your loved ones, neighbors, fellow countrymen, and so on, up to all sentient beings, infinite as space. As in the practice of the flow of compassion and the fourth reason for compassion already mentioned: "Because of separation through birth and death we, mother and child, are like a heap of peas that have been hit by a stone. We wander about, unable to recognize, let alone help, each other. Without having even heard or seen each other, we have been scattered in different places. Whatever happiness or suffering may happen to my mother, she is worthy of compassion!" After you have wholeheartedly meditated like this, imagine: "How wonderful it would be if these mothers of mine actualized the state of a supreme deity!" Think that, as a consequence of that, all your mother sentient beings swiftly transform into a yidam deity in which appearance and emptiness are inseparably united. Then settle your mind in an open state free of thoughts and conceptual elaboration. This will help you to make progress and enhance your compassion. The source of the Mahāyāna path is the mind of compassion, A stream of nectar, swiftly granting benefit and happiness, The supreme cure that quenches hatred's burning fires. Rely on it continually and buddhahood is at your fingertips. May the words by which I have expounded This most excellent discourse on compassion Be seeds of merit that produce A pleasure grove of benefit and happiness! The carefree yogi named Mañjughoṣa compiled this text from a very concise instruction manual by Nesarpa Jamyang Khyentse Wangchuk. May it be virtuous! 
